📌 Overview
OptiSmart is a deep learning–based computer vision project designed to detect and classify eye diseases from retinal images. The system uses a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) trained on a labeled dataset of eye images to automatically identify conditions such as cataract, glaucoma, diabetic retinopathy, and normal eyes.
This project focuses on model development, training, and evaluation, and is executed entirely within a development environment (VS Code), without any web or mobile interface.
🎯 Objectives
Build a robust CNN model for medical image classification
Detect multiple eye diseases from retinal images
Ensure reliable evaluation using Stratified K-Fold Cross-Validation
Reduce dependency on manual diagnosis methods
🧠 Key Features
Multi-class image classification (4 categories)
Custom CNN architecture
Stratified K-Fold validation for balanced evaluation
Data augmentation for improved generalization
Offline inference via IDE (no deployment layer)
📂 Dataset
Source: Kaggle Eye Disease Dataset
Total Images: ~4217
Classes:
Cataract
Glaucoma
Diabetic Retinopathy
Normal
The dataset is relatively balanced across all categories, making it suitable for classification tasks.
⚙️ Tech Stack
🧠 Machine Learning
Python
TensorFlow / Keras
NumPy
Scikit-learn
🧪 Development Environment
VS Code
Jupyter Notebook (optional for experimentation)
🔁 Project Pipeline
Plain text
1. Dataset Loading
2. Data Preprocessing (resize, normalization)
3. Data Augmentation (rotation, zoom, flip)
4. Stratified K-Fold Split (k=5)
5. CNN Model Training
6. Model Evaluation (accuracy, precision, recall, F1-score)
7. Model Saving
8. Manual Image Input → Prediction in VS Code
🧠 Model Architecture
Convolutional Layers (feature extraction)
ReLU Activation (non-linearity)
MaxPooling Layers (dimensionality reduction)
Dense Layers (classification)
Dropout (overfitting prevention)
Softmax Output (multi-class probability)
📊 Evaluation Metrics
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1-Score
These metrics are computed during training and validation across all folds.
🔍 Validation Strategy
Stratified K-Fold Cross-Validation (k=5) was used to:
Maintain class balance in each fold
Reduce bias from random splitting
Provide reliable performance estimation
🖥️ How It Works
The model is trained on preprocessed eye images
After training, the model is saved
A new image is manually provided in the code
The model predicts the disease class
Output is displayed in the terminal/IDE
🚀 How to Run
1. Install dependencies
Bash
pip install tensorflow keras numpy scikit-learn opencv-python matplotlib
2. Run training script
Bash
python train.py
3. Run prediction
Bash
python predict.py
💻 System Requirements
RAM: 8 GB minimum
GPU (optional but recommended): 4GB+ VRAM
CPU-only execution is possible but slower
⚠️ Limitations
Model trained on a relatively small dataset
No real-world noisy data handling
No deployment (web/app interface)
No explainability (e.g., Grad-CAM)
🔮 Future Improvements
Use Transfer Learning (ResNet, EfficientNet)
Add confidence score in predictions
Integrate Grad-CAM for visualization
Deploy using Flask / FastAPI
Train on larger clinical datasets
🧾 Conclusion
OptiSmart demonstrates how deep learning can be applied to medical imaging for early-stage disease detection. By combining CNNs with stratified validation, the project ensures both performance and reliability, making it a strong foundation for future healthcare AI systems.